//Chapter One//

The Vikings were much more than we’ve previously thought—or at least that’s what the reveal trailer for Assassin’s Creed Valhalla was signaling loud and clear when it was released last year. For the first minute or so of the game’s trailer, Valhalla’s Vikings are depicted as not merely “heartless, godless barbarians.” Instead—the trailer claimed—Vikings were family-oriented, protectors of women, children, and their communities. Valhalla’s first promotional flourish hinted at a game that would challenge widespread ideas about the Vikings. Instead of depicting them as just ruthless murderers who simply pillage and move on, it offered a more nuanced position on a more complicated people and time.

But when mainstream entertainment products make these claims, it often seems like a red flag—or perhaps a setup for disappointment. For the remainder of its airtime, the trailer also promised that this franchise installment would allow players to experience ninth-century England #LikeAViking: by enacting brutal, bloody violence against the Saxons. Realistically, it wouldn’t be much of a promo for an Assassin’s Creed game if it didn’t do this: in the broadest possible terms (and aside from the usual Assassin’s Creed sci-fi metanarrative), the game’s overall historical subject matter is the Viking conquest of England, as much as (if not more so than) about Vikings making a home.

I’m not a historian of the Middle Ages, and so I willingly leave critique of the game’s representation of this specific period to those with more authority.1 But even in the first marketing release for the game, we can see echoes of the kind of juxtaposition that haunts many, if not most, mainstream historical games on the market: a desire to claim originality and difference, but paradoxically alongside a deep-seated need to speak to and fulfill preestablished expectations. The Vikings, according to the game makers, aren’t like the stereotypes you’ve heard. But fortunately, they promise, you will get to play as those stereotypes nonetheless.